---
id: introduction
title: Syllabus
---

# Trends in Modern Web Development

Learn to build and deploy scalable, modern full-stack web applications using
best practices in industry's most used tech stacks.

By [Cornell DTI](http://cornelldti.org/). Read our article about the first run
of the course on
[Medium](https://medium.com/cornell-design-tech-initiative/cornell-dti-trends-in-web-development-4cb5abc56776)!

## Logistics

Assuming nothing goes wrong, Trends in Web Development will be **IN PERSON**
this semester. Unfortunately, we will not be able to provide recordings for
lecture, although lecture notes will be posted on this website.

Lectures will be held on **TBA** at **TBA** (after 5pm most likely).

Join our EdStem discussion here: (link TBA)

## Course Application

Apply [here](https://bit.ly/web-dev-fa22) by TBA at 11:59 PM ET. It includes a general information questionnaire so we have the information necessary for enrollment, as well as a preassessment you must complete.

We will be distributing enrollment/permission pins soon after the application period closes.

## Introduction

This class will teach students about modern web development technologies,
practices, and industry standards to better equip them for academic work,
research, interviews, internships, and full-time employment. By the end of this
course, you will gain key experience in designing systems on both the frontend
and backend using today's popularly applied technologies, including TypeScript,
React, Firebase, and more.

## When are office hours?

Please check Ed for any updates to OH times or locations!

Office hours will start on TBA.

TBA

If you are unable to make any of those office hours times, you can ask questions
on Ed or get in touch with [Michael](mailto:met236@cornell.edu),
[Akash](mailto:aa753@cornell.edu).

## Is there a lecture schedule?

Lectures will begin on **TBA** (latter half of september). Here is a tentative schedule for the
topics that will be covered (subject to change). We are holding the last lecture
on **TBA** (well before finals week).

Lecture Schedule TBD

## Where are assignments released and submitted?

Assignments will be released on [here](/docs/assignments) every TBA. Every
assignment is due right before class of the following week at 3:59pm unless
otherwise stated. You will have 6 slip days total to use on the assignments, but
for each assignment, you may only use up to 2 slip days. Use these judiciously
because we will not be handling extensions outside of slip days.

Assignments must be submitted on CMS. We will not take submissions emailed to
us. If you are not on the CMS please email [Michael](mailto:met236@cornell.edu),
[Akash](mailto:aa753@cornell.edu).

## What will be taught?

By the end of the course, students will be have a much more in-depth
understanding of JavaScript as it pertains to many common software libraries
used in web development. These libraries include (but are not limited to) React,
Next.js, Node.js, Yarn / npm, and Firebase. The exact technologies can shift
from semester to semester as demands from students, and in the industry, evolve
and change. What is in demand now may not be desired in two years from now. The
primary technologies that this class is powered by can shift from semester to
semester to reflect what employers are looking for.

Throughout this course, students will work as individuals and in groups to apply
these skills to projects. These are both skills that are extremely important to
employers: being able to function independently on assigned tasks, and being
able to collaborate with different people on a wide variety of tasks. The idea
is to closely resemble milestones and checkpoints in project development, which
occur with one to many people.

## What are the prerequisites?

This course will be covering both client-facing and server-side technologies. CS
1110 or equivalent programming experience is a pre-requisite.

Please complete the pre-assessment [here](/preassessment.zip). It should take
less than an hour! This is not meant as a test, but rather a way of ensuring
that you are familiar with the foundational material in the course. Upload your
submissions as a zip to your application at https://bit.ly/web-dev-fa22. **This
preassessment is mandatory; those who do not submit it will not be admitted in
the course.**

## What is the expected workload?

Students should expect to work anywhere from 5-6 hours per week in this course.

## What software will be supported in the course?

We strongly recommend VSCode, but you are free to use whichever text editor or
programming IDE of your choice. Keep in mind that course staff will have the
most experience with VSCode.

## How many credits is it?

Two credits S/U.

## What's the grading policy?

Attendance - 20% (based on weekly lecture quizzes, can miss 1 of 10 without penalty)

Filling out Feedback - 10%

Final project - 20%

Assignments - 50%

Keep in mind that you only need a C- (70) or higher to pass. If you ever feel
that you are falling behind, please feel free to talk to us and we will try our
best to find a solution.

## Who should I contact with questions?

[Michael](mailto:met236@cornell.edu) or [Akash](mailto:aa753@cornell.edu)

## Policies

### Academic Integrity

As a programming course, you may find yourself in a position to copy or
appropriate code that someone else has written. Please cite any code or media
that you do not have direct authorship of on any assignments submitted to the
course. Code should receive a citation to the original author as a comment in
your source code, while media citations (images, videos) should be visible on
the page that they appear.

### Accessibility

We seek to make this class as inclusive as possible for all students. If you
have accommodations with Student Disability Services and require access to any
class accommodations, please speak to an instructor before the first lecture and
we will work with you to make arrangements as necessary.
